[[[`                     systematicawesome.jacobcole.net](http://systematicawesome.jacobcole.net/) > worldquestguild.connectr.site](http://worldquestguild.connectr.site) > startupideas.jacobcole.net](http://startupideas.jacobcole.net)
#project #connectordoc
[started by jacob@ideaflow.io](mailto:jacob@ideaflow.io)

Excess Vetted Startup Ideas
Vetted ideas it didn’t make sense for people who came up with them to do, but someone definitely should do

[Related: http://hackathonprojects.jacobcole.net/](http://hackathonprojects.jacobcole.net/)
- [Global Idea Bank](http://globalideabank.jacobcole.net)

# Ideas

- “ThunderPledge” – a website like Kickstarter for pledging to take collective actions when you reach a critical mass. For instance, there are a large number of people who would consider becoming vegetarian for climate reasons but  feel like it's pointless unless millions of others do the same. Using ThunderPledge you could pledge to become vegetarian only when a million other people have also committed the same. At that point, not only would you know for certain that your change is part of making a difference, but you would have a ready-made support group of people all trying to do the same thing.

- This generalizes to many  applications – for instance organizing a boycott. Boycotts are useless unless they reach critical mass. (A friend called this “Kickstopper”!). Additionally it could perhaps be worth making a variant “ThunderVote”  specifically dedicated to the voting use case. If you are, for instance, a democrat in a largely Republican area, you might think it's useless for you to get out and vote. But using this site, you could mark who you’d vote for with the touch of a button, but only pledge to actually make it to the polls if a thousand other people of your same political leanings in your district do the same.
- http://thunderpledge.jacobcole.net/
- [Looking for: designer, full stack engineering collaborator. Email jacob@ideaflow.io](mailto:jacob@ideaflow.io)

- CaaS (CBT as a service, this isn’t about therapy

- Full voice control email interface for quadriplegic patients. Vastly underserved — ping Jacob for references on this (formerly worked with quadriplegic patients).

-

- Pitch-based scrolling - e.g. when you sing middle C, the document jumps to 50% mark. natural tool for voice recognition users/RSI/paralyzed patients  #assistiveTechnology” ~Jacob Cole

- EMDR therapy (Powerful eye tracking based psychotherapy for PTSD) via VR and Eye Tracking

- VR or just good game where you can explore beauty of nature and interesting ecosystems, e.g. rainforests and coral reefs

- [Accent removal machine learning style transform filter for tech-support calls ~jacob@ideaflow.io](mailto:jacob@ideaflow.io)

- ++ (Yes. Thought about this before and want this to exist).
- Or adding a British accent

- ["Guitar hero typing tutor. Typing tutor that plays musical notes when you hit each key. you hit all the keys just right, it plays a song! Maybe it could be like guitar hero, where accompaniment is automatically added.” ~Jacob Cole #educationalGame #game ~jacob@ideaflow.io](mailto:jacob@ideaflow.io)

- Something that saves filters for you on websites.  There are still a bunch of sites (for example ecommerce) where I always want to restrict the view to a common subset of filters.  - David

- Safe+Easy way to do remote desktopping with other people. Would be great if you could contact tech support somewhere and they could view your desktop+do actions for you. - David

- Just a better web depot for gardening (resources+purchasing).  Gardening@home is going through a boom right now, during covid. - David
- David Chen:  I feel like there's additional work in just informing and mobilizing people re: climate that can be done. The top of funnel of "what to learn/how do I help" is pretty undersupported right now

- David Chen: I'm personally interested in structuring and augmenting information/memory/recall - I feel like stuff like Roam makes you do too much work.

- David Chen:  Less invasive ways to get mental feedback. When you're learning sports, it's a lot easier (I think) to get physical feedback: your form doesn't look right, or the ball isn't going in the right spot. But if you're trying to train a thought pattern (eg. I want to be less distracted/not despair as much), it's harder because you're not looking for that thought pattern at the point of thinking, you're busy being distracted. I think it'd be super-good to have a way to get thought feedback
-

# Drafts / Brainstorms

http://vrcoralreefs.jacobcole.net/

http://aieducation.jacobcole.net/

#Idea #StartupIdea  3-D screens and sunlight lamps maybe even with UV or bio charger to make indoor spaces or darker spaces have beautiful views, office, buildings rooms, etc. Could even have that in prisons #PrisonReform

#idea customized art therapy generated by AI – relate art therapy, color therapy to TCM
- related  LLM poetic equivalent of  “light language” for healing transmitted by llm

#experimental #Idea #cv #ai #ar to emulate Donna Eden style energy synesthesia / the work of medical intuitives. Visualize “auric field”

qigong video game #idea

YouTube for poetry, except generated poetry ultimately learns your algorithm. #Idea #AI
Causal inference for clinical trials with multifactor medicine treatments. #CausalInference. #Idea #AI. @x
Pureland app – app that shows you all of the pure health food, sustainable, organic restaurants, etc. in a given location/products you can buy and even evaluate different dishes etc. so that you can basically transform any city into a map of what is uncontaminated. #Idea @o

## Long terms goals
#vision #idea good influence influencers — who are people who have been a good influence on you? how did they influence you? How can we scale? ? #essayContest? #curationContest? auto add projects and categories to todos with ai ? #feature for messy dumps of scattered insights into what's worthwhile epiphanies

## Nonprofit
[#idea all ages thiel fellowship for people with manifestos talent, big vision #good[a]](#cmnt1)

# People

[David Chen itsdchen@gmail.com](mailto:itsdchen@gmail.com)

[Spencer Kim <spencerk@mit.edu](mailto:spencerk@mit.edu)>
[Adam Lawrence <adam@im-asl.org](mailto:adam@im-asl.org)>
Jacob Cole

[Looking for: designer, full stack engineering collaborator. Email jacob@ideaflow.io](mailto:jacob@ideaflow.io) #lookingfor

# More Below

## Mocks
#todo

## See Also
http://infrastructure.jacobcole.net/
http://worldquestguild.connectordocs.com/
http://volunteerforce.jacobcole.net/

[[a]](#cmnt_ref1)really love this idea of all-ages thiel fellowship but not run by actual nazis